---
layout: essay.html
title: Ari Navetta
description: Essays
heading-one: "KNYUM & ETRMC"
---

Vichet Chum’s one-man play KNYUM and Flannery O’Connor’s short story “Everything that Rises Must Converge” represent the struggle between pursuing traditional ideals of success and furthering progress in an ever-changing world. Both protagonists are young men trying to make it as writers who have trouble finding their voice. O’Connor’s character, Julian, wants to escape his deeply prejudiced and overbearing mother by writing for a modern audience, whereas Chum’s fictionalized version of himself, named Guy, plans to write about the Cambodian- American experience to get rid of the intrinsic guilt he feels at having had a much easier life than his parents. Julian cannot fully commit to being a writer but also feels he is destined for more than a traditional career, and so is unable to do either. Guy is trying to be both successful and progressive as a writer, but his parents fear this path will bring him neither ideal, and he subconsciously agrees with them.

In Julian’s mind, success is being stronger than his mother and not having to rely on anyone else, living in a house “where the nearest neighbors [are] three miles away,” (O’Connor 1). While he wishes to fulfill these dreams, Julian knows it will never happen. He blames this on his mother, but recognizes that he himself is the only obstacle, or at least believes “he [is] too intelligent to be a success,” (5). The simultaneous disdain and yearning he feels for the affluence of his slave-owning ancestors creates a divide in Julian. Part of him feels he deserves to suffer in life, and his family’s time is over; that his “‘...great-grandfather had a plantation and two hundred slaves’” is no longer a bragging right (2). The other part of him wants to start a new chapter in his family’s history, and to be successful in the modern, more open world. His relationship with his mother is a reflection of this struggle, as he does not attempt to achieve either route, opting instead to occupy his life with trying to “overcome” his mother. He does not know how to pursue his dreams, since he wants to be a writer but does not truly believe he has something to say. He is frustrated and left stuck by his conflicting ideas.

Guy is pursuing an idea of success very different from Julian’s. He is looking for his parents to be proud of what he has become, and what they have made possible for him by overcoming the many hardships in their lives. While they give him support, he feels a tremendous pressure from his parents to find a practical line of work such as theirs. He finds their work to be boring, but also understands why they ask about his getting “two degrees now, [and what will he] do with them?” (Chum 5). Guy aims to write “the Cambodian people’s Grapes of Wrath,” an impossible feat for someone who has never been to Cambodia (6). He is not able to achieve his idealized success because he is trying for the impossible: satisfy hard-working parents who want him to have stability in life, and at the same time pursue an undertaking he is unable to finish that would likely bring him neither success nor stability.

While Julian and Guy are decidedly different characters, they face similar struggles when it comes to making something of themselves. Both are attempting to use writing as a means to escape the life they currently live, but they are doing so in opposite ways. Julian wants to write as a way to break free from his drab life and convince himself he is not prejudiced like his mother and has something worthwhile to say. However, he is too emotionally attached to his mother to just accept their differences and move on. He also does not truly believe he has a unique opinion to contribute, or even that he is the modern man he tells himself he is. Even if Julian were to make it as a writer, his work would be a response to struggles with his mother, and so in a way fulfilling his dream would not be breaking away. Guy, on the other hand, writes to embrace his family’s Cambodian roots and make his parents proud by doing something he finds more interesting than the practical work they chose. “‘While they punch their time cards and make most of what time they’ve been granted,’” he feels it is now up to him to keep the spirit of Cambodia alive (Chum 5). The high standard he sets for his book to be an important work causes him to worry more about how to make it significant and focus less on simply writing what he wants to say. Guy is unable to write about the Cambodian-American because he was raised in America and his knowledge of Cambodia comes only from his parents’ stories; if he had the true experience his parents had he likely would not want to remember and write about it.

Everyone makes decisions that affect the path their life is on, whether they be conscious decisions or not. For some, this happens naturally and fluidly, but for others it can be a difficult task, and they find themselves overwhelmed. The choice between pursuing one’s idea of success - a form of stability and personal comfort, and progress - the development of not just one individual but also those impacted by them, is perhaps the most difficult decision anyone has to face. Choosing which course to take may raise more questions than answers; questions of whether you can have both ideals at once, of which one will provide the most happiness in life, and of the very nature of this personal struggle. Julian and Guy fall into the category of people who find themselves stuck at a crossroads, worried that neither option will provide any happiness at all. If they were able to look at themselves objectively, without comparison to the struggles their families have gone through, they would be able to find their unique voice and write truly.
