---
layout: essay.html
title: Ari Navetta | Where Society Falsely Trusts
description: Essays
heading-one: "Where Society Falsely Trusts"
---

Since people are uncomfortable with having gaps in their knowledge, we rely on others who are more experienced to make judgements which we then adopt into our own beliefs. This practice is the foundation of how reputations are formed. While this is understandable, it blinds people from taking the time to know something truly, instead causing them to base the way they treat each other on an “idle and most false imposition, oft got without merit and lost without deserving,” as Shakespeare describes reputation in Othello (2.3.257-259). Reputations must be meticulously upheld and can be ruined by one mistake, and this pressure often causes people to take actions outside their true nature. No single characterization can sum up an entire human being accurately, therefore the incredible importance with which we value reputation is misplaced.

Our ability to act according to social expectations determines reputation. This subjective interpretation of our actions by others strongly impacts what happens in our lives. Macbeth seems able to do no wrong in the beginning of the play, and continues to climb the social ladder simply by doing his job well. After fighting off rebels from Norway, the King of Scotland himself, Duncan, feels that Macbeth is “due more than all can pay” (1.4.24). After his interaction with the mysterious witches who predict the monarchy will be his one day, being Thane of Cawdor and of Glamis is not enough to satisfy Macbeth's “vaulting ambition” (1.7.27). Pressure from Lady Macbeth causes him to go back on his previous decision that “If chance will have [him] king, why, chance may crown [him] / Without [his] stir,” murdering Duncan and bypassing the rightful heirs to become king (1.4.157-159). This decision ultimately backfires for Macbeth, resulting in his death at the hands of Macduff. Here, Macbeth made a tremendous gamble, betting that his stellar reputation would get him onto the throne. If Malcolm and Donalbain had not fled, he would have needed the other lords to think of him as a more fit ruler than either brother, but since they did flee, Macbeth needed to be the unanimously chosen leader out of all Scotland’s lords. Thus it was other characters, not Macbeth, who decided his fate. Macbeth did not beg to be made king, and the authority to make this life-changing decision was wrongfully taken away from him, despite this being his intention from the start.

Once obtained, reputation must be upheld despite how inflexible this can prove to be. You cannot attempt to improve your reputation further on your own; an act performed for the purpose of changing your image is seen as selfish, and will instead damage your reputation. Macbeth made this mistake when he made the decision to kill Duncan for personal gain, putting the status he already had on the line. Further, if a reputation is lost, as they so often are, it is impossible to try and regain previous stature. Even before Macbeth’s crime was discovered, his thanes turned on him the second they saw a weakness in the monarchy. After his first banquet as king, when Macbeth claimed to see the ghost of Banquo and scared off the members of his court, Lennox immediately attacked Macbeth behind his back, questioning the suspicious circumstances that led to Macbeth’s coronation, asking if his killing of the king’s sleeping guards “Was not... nobly done… and wisely, too, / For ‘twould have angered any heart alice / To hear the men deny [that they had killed Duncan]” (3.6.15-17). This accusation turned more serious: “Men must not walk too late” while Macbeth is in power (3.6.8). At this point, the lords may have suspected Macbeth was involved in Duncan’s murder, but they did not know that for a fact. The lapse in proper behavior Macbeth demonstrated that night opened the floodgates for his court to do more inspection into his character and tie his talk of murder at the banquet to the very recent murder of their king. This one mistake led the way for Macbeth’s end; had he been able to keep his calm in public, he may have very well gotten away with his crime.

Theoretical experiences become idealized in our heads and look much better than they do in reality. Once he finally sat on the throne - something he had murdered more than once for - the pressure to increase reputation tormented Macbeth further by forcing him to worry about maintaining status rather than enjoying power. He found himself “Stepped in so far that, should [he] wade no more, / Returning [would be] as tedious as go o’er” and could not shake the thought that all he had done was fruitless (3.4.169-170). When found in situations such as this, where reputation seems to be spiraling out of control, people often attempt desperate acts to get it all back. By this point, Macbeth was too addled to try and regain power, but even with a clear mind, there was nothing he could have done; Macduff had plans to take the monarchy from him even before he had it, and no desperate power play could have gotten his reputation back. Macbeth’s killing of Duncan in the first place was not a part of his typical nature, but something easily pulled out by encouraging him to pursue greater position. This pressure caused Macbeth to make a series of uncharacteristic decisions that backfired at every turn.

Those who want to bring about change are dependent on having a good reputation. Without one, they will not be taken seriously by the populous, and their message will be disregarded. If someone in Macbeth’s position, with a healthy reputation and some power, wanted to institute changes, they have two viable options. They could gain power by rising through ranks in the establishment they plan to change and go about enacting modifications from within, which Macbeth nearly succeeded at. His flaw was in killing Duncan, a king revered by his subjects. After taking down a highly-praised figurehead, your reputation is ruined and there is no way to succeed in getting others on your side. The other option is to convince the populous that the societal expectations they have been forced to adhere to are wrong, after which it is easy to attack the status quo. The success of either route is dependent on the leader of change being in good standing and maintaining this reputation despite any opposition they may face, but this should not be the case. Those with good reputation, such as Macbeth, often are not true allies but simply know how to play the game. The reverse of that can also be true; those who society rejects may have much more noble intentions than those without status, but have not been given a chance to prove themself.
